HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Republicans square
off on the debate stage, the
final face-to-face
before Super Tuesday, while
Democrats look
to South Carolina and beyond to
break the
tie.
Also ahead: looking at the
U.S.'s role in
the possible Syrian cease-fire,
and if the
agreement will hold amidst
looming unrest
and political distrust.
Plus, we sit down with the
mother of one of
the Columbine shooters to talk
about her new
memoir on living in the
aftermath of tragedy.
SUE KLEBOLD, Author, "A Mother's
Reckoning:
Living in the Aftermath of
Tragedy": I stood
up and thought I was going to be
sick. I -- it
was such a shock to me, because
it didn't
make sense that a child that I
loved could
actually be doing those things
or could have
planned to do those things.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The political
drama over
the U.S. Supreme Court vacancy
took a new
twist today. The Republican
governor of Nevada,
Brian Sandoval, withdrew his
name from consideration.
Sandoval said in a statement:
"The notion
of being considered for a seat
on the highest
court in the land is beyond
humbling." But
he gave no reason for his
decision. Senate
Republicans say they will not
consider any
nominee from President Obama.
Nevertheless,
the White House says the
president will meet
with Senate leaders next week.
Battered communities across
Southeastern Virginia
began cleaning up today, after
tornadoes struck
Wednesday evening. The storms
killed four
people and injured dozens more.
Three of the
dead were in the small town of
Waverly, about
40 miles southeast of Richmond.
Governor Terry McAuliffe
declared a state
of emergency and toured the area
today.
GOV. TERRY MCAULIFFE (D),
Virginia: I was
just amazed at the length and
the width of
this tornado that struck here.
But as you
go along and then you will see
structures
totally gone, but you will see
just gigantic
areas of trees just snapped in
half, gigantic
trees just laying on the ground.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Farther north,
in Pennsylvania,
the storm system roared through
Lancaster
County, peeling off roofs and
damaging businesses.
Two 600-foot chicken sheds and
several barns
were destroyed.
The number of migrants stranded
in northern
Greece built today
The number of migrants stranded
in northern
Greece built today
as Macedonia allowed only a
trickle to head
north. Some 3,500 people braved
bitter cold
at a camp on the Greek side this
morning as
they waited to cross. To the
south, thousands
more set up camp at a port
terminal outside
Athens after police barred them
from moving
on.
WOMAN: Some people say a lot of
things, make
us worried, and like the
border is closing. And I don't
-- I don't
WOMAN: Some people say a lot of
things, make
us worried, and like the
border is closing. And I don't
-- I don't
know. A lot of things make us
more and more
and more tired. And we only need
to -- these
know. A lot of things make us
more and more
and more tired. And we only need
to -- these
things to be solved, and to know
what should
we do. We can't, like, only
sleep in the streets.
things to be solved, and to know
what should
we do. We can't, like, only
sleep in the streets.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Greece also
recalled its
ambassador to Austria to protest
border restrictions
HARI SREENIVASAN: Greece also
recalled its
ambassador to Austria to protest
border restrictions
by the Austrians and Balkan
states. And Prime
Minister Alexis Tsipras insisted
his country
cannot become a warehouse for
refugees.
In Italy, the national senate
voted to allow
civil unions for gay couples
after a battle
that lasted for years. The bill
passed easily
and now goes to the Lower House
of Parliament
for final approval. Prime
Minister Matteo
Renzi called the vote historic.
Italy would
be the last country in Western
Europe to take
that step. But gay and lesbian
groups denounced
the measure because it doesn't
allow gay adoption.
Back in this country, Apple
asked a federal
magistrate to reverse her order
on helping
the FBI hack a locked iPhone. It
was used
by one of the killers in the San
Bernardino
mass shootings in California.
The company's
court filing accused the
government of seeking
dangerous power over digital
privacy.
And Wall Street stayed in the
win column for
a second day. The Dow Jones
industrial average
gained 212 points to close near
16700. The
Nasdaq rose nearly 40 points,
and the S&P
500 added almost 22.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
how Hillary
Clinton and Bernie Sanders fare
among minority
voters; the tricky diplomacy
surrounding the
Syrian cease-fire; when economic
anxiety meets
politics; and much more.
This day was a quiet one on the
Republican
campaign trail: five candidates
left, but
This day was a quiet one on the
Republican
campaign trail: five candidates
left, but
no scheduled events.
Tonight, though, they're facing
off in Houston
for debate number 10. Donald
Trump, winner
of three straight contests, will
once again
be center stage. The big
question, how the
of three straight contests, will
once again
be center stage. The big
question, how the
other four candidates try to
slow him down.
As for the two Democrats, they
were out stumping
today, but hundreds of miles
apart. Hillary
Clinton spent the day in South
Carolina, where
Democrats vote this Saturday. In
Kingstree,
she stressed one of the central
themes of
her Palmetto State campaign:
equality.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I want to break down all the
barriers that
stand in the way of people
everywhere in our
country pursuing and achieving
their God-given
potential, because America can't
live up to
its potential unless we remove
the barriers
to let every American have the
chance to live
up to his or her potential.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Her rival,
Bernie Sanders,
turned his focus away from South
Carolina
today. He started things off in
Ohio, one
of the many states that vote in
March. From
there, he moved on to Flint,
Michigan, the
city still reeling from the
discovery that
there, he moved on to Flint,
Michigan, the
city still reeling from the
discovery that
its drinking water had been
tainted with lead.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
If there's any anything
positive, if there's
any silver lining out of this
tragedy, is,
it is my hope that the American
people will
look at Flint and say never
again can we allow
a community to undergo this.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the ground
in South Carolina
today is our own Judy Woodruff,
who joins
us from Columbia.
So, Judy, how important is South
Carolina
for Hillary Clinton's campaign?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hi there, Hari,
from across
the street from the state
capitol here in
Columbia.
It's important for Hillary
Clinton. I have
to say, though, that the
expectation is that
she clearly is going to win. The
polls all
have her ahead by more than
double -- by double
digits. So it's really a matter
of expectations.
Can she beat that?
In fact, I had a professor, a
political science
professor, at the University of
South Carolina
say to me today, if she wins by
less than
20 points, it's a moral victory
for Bernie
Sanders. That's how far ahead
she is.
Some of that is clearly on the
strength of
the African-American community.
They make
up more than half of the
Democratic primary
vote. And that's going to be in
that report
I'm working on for the
"NewsHour" tomorrow.
But her people are working the
state, Hari.
They're not taking it for
granted, but it's
all about the margins now for
her.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And the
Sanders campaign
looks to be doing kind of a
different tactic,
not there nearly as much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's right.
Senator Sanders was here
yesterday, but he
had a morning news conference.
Then he took
off for other states, had big
rallies yesterday
out in the Midwest and the
Southwestern U.S.
He has a strong effort here,
Hari. He was
here in January, but losing
Nevada, coming
in five points behind Hillary
Clinton in Nevada
really made a difference.
And now the Sanders camp say
they are focused
on the Super Tuesday states, the
11 states
where Democrats will come out
and vote next
Tuesday. So, they have been very
open about
that. It's not that they're
giving up on South
Carolina by any means. They have
got something
like 200 people working the
state for them
right now, but their focus is on
the future.
It's on Missouri. It's on states
like Oklahoma,
where Senator Sanders had that
big turnout
last night -- or yesterday -- in
Tulsa. And
they, too, talk about the
margin. They say
they don't expect to win here;
they just don't
want to hold down Secretary
Clinton's margin.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Do you see and
hear the
evidence on the airwaves, the
political ads,
I'm assuming, on TV and radio as
you travel
through from interview to
interview?
JUDY WOODRUFF: You do.
You see it -- certainly see it
in your hotel
room. People talk about the ads.
Hillary -- Bernie
Sanders was on the air here
early, but Hillary
Clinton has stepped up her
advertising in
the last week. You see this new
ad they put
on a few days ago featuring the
actor Morgan
Freeman with his very
distinctive voice reminding
anybody who's watching that
Hillary Clinton
had been coming to South
Carolina since she
was a law student, recapping her
connection
to this state.
That clearly helps her. Sanders
is running
a lot of ads on radio. He spent
over a million
dollars, but, at this point, as
we get down
to the vote on Saturday, it's
more of Hillary
Clinton on the air.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What are the
issues that
are most important to South
Carolinians now
that you're hearing from?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hari, it's
probably what you're
hearing in other parts of the
country from
Democrats. They talk about the
economy. They
want to see jobs.
A lot of discussion about
equality, about
how they feel that part of the
country, part
of America has been left out of
the prosperity
we have seen in the recovery
since the financial
collapse. And they -- when you
talk to voters,
they talk about which candidate
is going to
be better able to deliver relief
from what
they feel is a growing
inequality.
And they also bring up who can
beat the Republican
in the fall. They're already
talking about
Donald Trump. They have noticed
how well he's
doing. They want a candidate who
can beat
him. And among the candidates --
or among
the voters I have spoken to,
some of them
think Hillary Clinton would be
the stronger
candidate against Donald Trump.
Others say
that -- Bernie Sanders.
So, I have seen a split in that
way, but these
voters are very practical in
their thinking,
and I think that may tell you
something about
Super Tuesday as well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Judy Woodruff
on the road in Columbia, South
Carolina, looking
forward to your report tomorrow
night. Thanks
so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The president
met this afternoon
at the State Department with
members of his
national security team to
discuss the fight
against ISIS and the state of
the larger war
in Syria, as a key deadline
approaches tomorrow
for a cessation of hostilities.
He spoke to reporters moments
ago.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
And none of us are under any
illusions. We're
all aware of the many potential
pitfalls.
And there are plenty of reasons
for skepticism.
But history would judge us
harshly if we didn't
do our part in at least trying
to end this
terrible conflict with
diplomacy. If implemented
-- and that's a significant if
-- the cessation
could reduce the violence and
get more food
and aid to Syrians who are
suffering and desperately
need it.
It could save lives.
Potentially, it could
also lead to negotiations on a
political settlement
to end the civil war, so that
everybody can
focus their attention on
destroying ISIL.
And that's why the United States
will do everything
we can to maximize the chances
of success
in this cessation of
hostilities.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, what are
the realities
for a potential halt to some of
the violence
and delivery of much-needed aid
in Syria?
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner reports.
MARGARET WARNER: There were
definitely mixed
signals of progress before
tomorrow's midnight
cease-fire deadline in Syria.
Aid trucks rolled
into the rebel-held Damascus
suburb of Ghouta
yesterday, long besieged by the
Assad regime.
But in Syria's east, a U.N.
airdrop of food
went awry. Earlier in the week,
Russia claimed
it's pared back bombing against
U.S.-backed
rebels.
MAJ. GEN. IGOR KONASHENKOV,
Russian Ministry
of Defense (through translator):
Russian aviation
performs no strikes in these
regions where
we have received or are
continuing to receive
claims to cease the fire and
start negotiations.
MARGARET WARNER: But, today,
there were reports
of Russian bombing of rebel-held
areas in
Syria's northwest and regime
bombing in a
suburb of Damascus.
The last-ditch agreement,
brokered Monday
by the U.S. and Russia, called
for a -- quote
-- "cessation of hostilities."
It exempts
operations against ISIS, the
al-Qaida linked
Jabhat al-Nusra, and terror
groups on a U.N.
list.
The Syrian government of
President Bashar
Assad has signed on, as have
some rebel groups.
But the major Saudi-backed
opposition group
said it would commit to just two
weeks.
SALEM AL MESLET, High
Negotiations Committee:
To be frank with you, we do not
trust Russia,
we do not trust this regime.
MARGARET WARNER: And U.S. ally
Turkey said
it wants to continue hitting
Syrian Kurds
linked to Turkey's Kurdish
terrorists.
The day after it was announced,
in Washington,
senators pressed Secretary of
State John Kerry.
WOMAN: I just hope it's not a
rope-a-dope
deal.
(CROSSTALK)
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: Well,
it may be. I'm not going to
vouch for this.
I'm not going to say this
process is sure
to work, because I don't know.
But I know
that this is the best way to try
to end the
war, and it's the only
alternative before
us, if indeed we're going to
have a political
settlement.
MARGARET WARNER: Many Syria
experts are skeptical
too. Robert Ford, former
ambassador to Syria,
resigned in 2014 over the
president's refusal
to arm the Syrian rebels. Now a
fellow with
the Middle East Institute in
Washington, he
also teaches at Yale.
ROBERT FORD, Former U.S.
Ambassador to Syria:
Secretary Kerry has made huge,
huge, huge
efforts, but it's too early to
say if it represents
any progress. The cease-fire is
going to be
a huge uphill. The Russians and
the Syrian
regime have incentives to keep
fighting. I
don't think the war is over by
any means.
MARGARET WARNER: But Prem Kumar,
who worked
on Syria on the National
Security Council
until last year, says it's an
important first
step.
PREM KUMAR, Former National
Security Council
Member: It is an important
process that will
hopefully lead to increased
humanitarian assistance,
and then, longer term, if the
process holds,
to discussions about the
longer-term political
issues that have bedeviled Syria
for several
years now.
MARGARET WARNER: He thinks it
marks a welcome
evolution in U.S. thinking, away
from regime
change.
PREM KUMAR: What is really
important about
this recent initiative is that I
think it
begins to shift from one in
which the U.S.
and its partners were trying to
increase pressure
on Assad to negotiate his own
departure to
trying to freeze the conflict,
provide humanitarian
assistance, and set up a process
to address
the longer-term political
issues.
MARGARET WARNER: What has caused
that shift?
The sudden insertion of Russian
bombers and
advisers late last September.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): The only right way
to fight international
terrorism in Syria and on the
territory of
the states neighboring it is to
act preemptively.
MARGARET WARNER: For months, as
Secretary
Kerry negotiated for a Syria
peace process
with Russia's foreign minister,
Russian bombers
were dramatically tilting the
battlefield.
Five months ago, the rebels were
gaining ground.
Now Assad's forces have retaken
key areas
in the west and surrounded
Aleppo, Syria's
largest city. And the Islamic
State has expanded
in the east. Ford sees Russia,
along with
Iran, Turkey and Saudi Arabia,
all backing
different fighting elements, as
exerting far
more leverage now than the U.S.
ROBERT FORD: Russia absolutely
is in the driver's
seat, and the Americans are
watching the car
drive by. The Americans are
becoming basically
irrelevant.
MARGARET WARNER: Former French
Foreign Minister
Laurent Fabius said the U.S.
lost credibility
when it didn't follow through on
the President
Obama's threat to strike Syria
for using chemical
weapons in 2013. He added, "One
doesn't get
the sense that there is a very
strong commitment.
And obviously the Iranians and
Russians feel
that."
Indeed, Mr. Obama repeatedly
resisted calls
to arm moderate rebel groups, as
he explained
to
The New York Times in 2014.
BARACK OBAMA: It has always been
a fantasy,
this idea that we could provide
some light
arms or even more sophisticated
arms to what
was essentially an opposition
made up of former
doctors, farmers, pharmacists
and so forth.
MARGARET WARNER: Mr. Obama's
aides say he
feared arming inexperienced
rebels would draw
the U.S. down a slippery slope
of deeper military
involvement. But Ford says the
president's
unwillingness did just that.
ROBERT FORD: I think that their
inaction put
us on a slippery slope. Frankly,
we now have
American military personnel
operating in Syria,
Margaret. None of us wanted that
in 2011,
in 2012, in 2013. But now we're
flying combat
operations against the Islamic
State, not
Syrians taking care of it,
Americans having
to help Syrians take care of it.
MARGARET WARNER: And, in fact,
the administration
is now asking Congress for
additional funds
for those operations. So, what
happens if
this cease-fire fails? On
Tuesday, Kerry hinted
that deeper military aid could
be forthcoming.
JOHN KERRY: There is a
significant discussion
taking place now about plan B in
the event
that we don't succeed at the
table.
MARGARET WARNER: Foreign
Relations Committee
Chair Bob Corker was dubious.
SEN. BOB CORKER (R), Tennessee:
There is no
plan B. Russia knows there will
be no plan
B.
ROBERT FORD: I saw Secretary
Kerry talk about
plan B. That's nice. We will see
if there's
anything there.
MARGARET WARNER: Kumar said
there is the possibility
of giving the rebels more
powerful weaponry
or creating safe-zones inside
Syria. But even
he doubts how much more the
president will
do in his remaining 11 months.
PREM KUMAR: I think it is
unlikely that the
administration is going to do a
180-degree
turn in its policy on Syria, but
I think if
the president begins to believe
that there
is progress in sight, and that
the U.S. needs
to do more in order to achieve
an end to the
conflict, then I think he would
be willing
to consider it.
MARGARET WARNER: A long road
ahead that depends
heavily on what happens this
weekend.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
the mother
of Columbine shooter Dylan
Klebold came to
terms with her son's actions;
the tunnels
that house Tijuana's homeless;
and a poet's
take on the popular term black
girl magic.
But, first, the economic
recovery may be well
into its sixth year, and the
jobless rate
is at its lowest point since
2008. Even so,
it's clear many Americans still
feel plenty
of anxiety, either about their
job, their
income, their finances or what
may be happening
to their quality of life.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman dives
deeper into what's behind that
with the first
of two conversations he has on
this subject.
This one features a liberal
perspective, part
of our weekly series Making
Sense, which airs
every Thursday on the
"NewsHour."
AUDIENCE: We love Trump! We love
Trump!
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Oh, we love you, we love you!
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: Not again, you may
be thinking.
DONALD TRUMP: We're going to
build a big,
beautiful wall.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
There is nothing we cannot
accomplish.
PAUL SOLMAN: Another story on
Trump and Sanders
as political outliers defining
this year's
presidential campaign?
DONALD TRUMP: We're in first
place everywhere.
PAUL SOLMAN: But why have they
taken America
by storm? We put that question
to longtime
liberal thinker Robert Reich,
friend of Hillary
Clinton since college, secretary
of labor
under her husband, Bill, but now
a Bernie
Sanders supporter.
Are you surprised by the turn
America has
taken politically in the last
half-year?
ROBERT REICH, Former U.S. Labor
Secretary:
I'm surprised at how fast it
happened. I predicted
in my book "Saving Capitalism"
that the biggest
political contest in the future
would be between,
not Democrats and Republicans,
but between
the anti-establishment populists
and the establishment,
because I saw the increase in
this degree
of anxious class, I call it,
anger and frustration
that the economy and society are
no longer
working for them.
PAUL SOLMAN: Covering economic
developments
in America since the 1970s, I
too have been
chronicling this growing anxiety
my entire
career.
I met security guard Bobby Hicks
five years
ago.
BOBBY HICKS, Security Guard: I
am the most
insecure security officer you
will meet, because
I'm worried. Right now, I live
paycheck to
paycheck.
PAUL SOLMAN: Cookie Sheers is an
administrative
assistant at a Boston nonprofit.
COOKIE SHEERS, Administrative
Assistant: We
all feel stuck, like you're just
at that edge
of water where you can come up
for air every
few minutes, but never long
enough to feel
that you have accomplished
something. You
always have to go back down.
PAUL SOLMAN: But anxiety isn't
limited to
the unskilled these days. Mike
Najjar is a
lawyer in Lowell, Massachusetts.
MIKE NAJJAR, Attorney: I feel
like I'm in
quicksand, not getting ahead,
not having any
growth.
MAN: I don't feel like I'm
getting ahead at
all. As a matter of fact, I was
laid off.
PAUL SOLMAN: After 40 years in
the book business,
does Brian McCormick (ph) have a
job now?
MAN: I do. I do. I'm punching a
cash register
like I did when I was 22 years
old.
PAUL SOLMAN: As recent college
graduate Biola
Jeje puts it:
BIOLA JEJE, Recent Graduate:
Take all this
debt, get an education, and have
it lead nowhere,
to like no sustainable
employment, no job
with health benefits or pensions
or any of
that, just be out on their own.
ROBERT REICH: I'm in an Uber,
part of the
explosion in the so-called
sharing economy.
This very group includes
independent contractors,
free agents, temporary workers,
the self-employed.
PAUL SOLMAN: Work without
employee benefits,
one of the topics Reich tackles
in a series
of videos made with the
so-called progressive
group MoveOn.org.
ROBERT REICH: It's estimated
that, in five
years, over 40 percent of the
American labor
force will be in such uncertain
work, in a
decade, most of us. This shifts
all the risks
onto workers.
PAUL SOLMAN: Workers like Uber
driver Kim
Miller, who has to pay for her
own car and
all related expenses.
KIM MILLER, Uber Driver:
Sometimes, I have
days where I do only maybe
around $12, $15
an hour, and I come home feeling
like I wasted
my time.
PAUL SOLMAN: Or retail clerks
like Melody
Pabon, who don't know when they
will work,
or for how many hours, from one
week to the
next.
MELODY PABON, Retail Clerk: Am I
going to
be playing juggling with my
money, and work
two days a week, three days a
week, four days
a week not knowing?
ROBERT REICH: No wonder,
according to polls,
almost a quarter of American
workers worry
they won't have enough to live
on in the future.
That's up from 15 percent a
decade ago.
PAUL SOLMAN: And you see it
playing out politically
in both parties, right?
ROBERT REICH: In both parties.
You have got
a large number of people in
America, in the
middle class, who are working
harder than
ever, but they're angry and
frustrated because
they're not getting ahead. Their
wages are
either stagnating or actually
dropping. Their
jobs are less secure. Two-thirds
are living
paycheck to paycheck.
PAUL SOLMAN: When you say
paycheck to paycheck,
the latest data as of this week
were that
63 percent of Americans didn't
have more than
$500 socked away for a sudden
expense.
ROBERT REICH: Almost nothing
socked away.
Black and minority Americans on
average have
literally nothing socked away
for an emergency.
And some people in the middle
class, particularly
in the lower middle class, look
to poor people
and say, well, they're getting
all these benefits.
I'm the one who's stuck.
ACTOR: Happy holidays, uncle
Bob.
ROBERT REICH: What's good about
them?
PAUL SOLMAN: People like
conservative uncle
Bob, portrayed by Reich himself
in this video.
ROBERT REICH: I'm paying too
much in taxes
to support poor people who are
sitting on
their duffs.
PAUL SOLMAN: Meanwhile, in the
left-wing camp:
ROBERT REICH: People are caught
in a vise,
and they feel like the game is
rigged.
PAUL SOLMAN: Are they
overstating it? Are
they picking up on something
that's real?
ROBERT REICH: Unfortunately, the
game is rigged.
Just over a year ago, two
political scientists,
one from Princeton, one from
Northwestern,
Gilens and Page, did a study
looking very
carefully at about over 2,000
policy issues.
And their conclusion was that
the wealthy
and big corporations and Wall
Street were
And their conclusion was that
the wealthy
and big corporations and Wall
Street were
the only ones that had any
influence.
The average American had
literally no influence
at all.
According to an investigation by
The New York
Times, half of all the money
contributed so
far to Democratic and Republican
presidential
candidates, $176 million, has
come from just
158 families, along with the
companies they
own or control.
I used to think -- and I used to
write about
it -- inequality as being the
result of globalization,
technological change. But what
has happened,
particularly over the last 20
years, is that
there is a third factor,
political power.
It is this vicious cycle of the
wealthy and
big corporations and Wall Street
getting rule
changes, legal changes that
advantage them
and really disadvantage most
other people.
PAUL SOLMAN: When you talk to a
rich person
who doesn't agree with you
politically, what
do you say to them?
ROBERT REICH: I say, you have a
stake in raising
wages, in expanding the middle
class, and
more Americans doing better,
because then
you will do better. Who are your
customers,
after all?
DENISE BARRANT, Unemployed: The
top 1 percent
is living well, and they don't
get it.
PAUL SOLMAN: Denise Barrant, a
self-described
conservative Republican, was
unemployed and
in foreclosure in 2011.
DENISE BARRANT: There's tons of
people like
myself out there who are
well-educated, who
have had good jobs, who are sort
of the middle
management people, but they have
outsourced
our jobs, and the top people are
still making
a lot of money and then
congratulating themselves
at how efficient they have been.
PAUL SOLMAN: The term that gets
turned around
over and over again is the
American dream.
And it doesn't seem as if that's
anywhere
near as true now as in the past.
ROBERT REICH: No. This is a
country that prided
itself on upward mobility, on
rags to riches,
on Horatio Alger stories.
It's only over the last two
years that you
see polls saying most Americans
believe that
their children are not going to
live as well
as they lived. This is new,
Paul. This is
counter to our tradition and our
history.
PAUL SOLMAN: Which may help
explain why this
has been, thus far, such an
untraditional
election year.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
economics
correspondent Paul Solman.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the coming
weeks, Paul
will return with a second
conversation, from
a well-known conservative
thinker and writer,
Charles Murray.
Now: coming to terms with a
beloved son-turned-killer
in a mass murder that would
shock the nation.
Jeffrey Brown has this latest
addition to
the "NewsHour" bookshelf.
A warning: The conversation
grapples with
subjects that may be upsetting
to some viewers.
JEFFREY BROWN: April 20, 1999,
Columbine High
School in Littleton, Colorado.
Two seniors, Eric Harris and
Dylan Klebold,
walked into the school armed
with weapons
and homemade bombs. Less than an
hour later,
12 students and one teacher were
dead, 24
students injured, and the two
shooters had
turned the guns on themselves.
It was a searing time for the
community, for
the victims' families, and for
the nation.
Seventeen years later, Sue
Klebold, the mother
of Dylan, writes of a son she
thought she
knew, the parent she thought she
was, a tragedy
and its aftermath. Her new book
is, "A Mother's
Reckoning."
Sue Klebold joins us now from
Denver.
Sue Klebold, welcome to you.
You write early in this book:
"The ordinariness
of our lives before Columbine
will perhaps
be the hardest thing for people
to understand
about my story. For me, it is
also the most
important."
Why is that the most important
thing?
SUE KLEBOLD, Author, "A Mother's
Reckoning:
Living in the Aftermath of
Tragedy": Because
I want people to understand
that, if someone
is struggling with thoughts of
suicide or,
in some cases, homicide, that
these issues
can be hidden.
And we should all try to be more
mindful of
what our loved ones are
thinking, what might
be hidden behind their
expressions, and how
their behaviors can lie if
they're very sophisticated
at hiding what they're thinking
and feeling.
JEFFREY BROWN: In fact, just
days before the
shooting, Dylan went to the
prom. You write
of seeing him as he came home.
And you write
of saying to yourself that
night, "I have
done a good job with this kid."
You truly believed that at that
moment?
SUE KLEBOLD: I truly believed
that at that
moment.
I felt that he had -- he had had
a good year,
a good evening. I felt that he
was contented
and that he was healthy and that
he was moving
forward with his life.
JEFFREY BROWN: The questions
from everyone,
of course, whether in sorrow or
anger or just
utter confusion, is, how could
you not have
known, right? How could you not
have known
that your son was so troubled
that he was
capable of something like this?
And you write about incidents
along the way,
which, in retrospect, might have
said something.
But how do you answer that
question, how could
you not have known?
SUE KLEBOLD: Sometimes, teen
behaviors, such
as sullenness, maybe differing
sleep patterns,
maybe they sleep too much or too
little, these
can all be perceived as normal
teen behaviors.
Dylan did get into trouble in
his junior year
of high school, and he stole
something. He
got in trouble at school. He
scratched a locker.
Those were indicators that
something might
be wrong, but, at that time, I
wasn't aware
that those could be indicators
of depression
or possibly some kind of brain
health issue.
But what did happen after that
was, he promised
us that he would get his life on
track, and
he did. He had a full 14 months
after that,
from that moment until the
tragedy, where
he was doing all the things a
healthy person
would do. He was going to
school. He held
a job. He had applied at four
colleges.
Just the weekend before the
tragedy, he picked
out his dorm room for college,
and he went
to a prom with 12 of his
friends, came home
and told me he had the best time
of his life.
These are not behaviors that one
would expect
of someone who is preparing to
die or to kill.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, perhaps the
roughest
chapter, at least for me in my
reading, was
one titled "The End of Denial,"
and because
you write about the denial that
you were in
for a long time after the --
after the shootings,
after the killings, even six
months afterwards,
until you were shown evidence by
the police,
walked through the timeline of
what happened,
see exactly what Dylan had done
in shooting
individuals, what he said to
them, and kind
of realizing for the first time
that he had
not been coerced, that he had
not been duped,
that he had not been whatever it
was you thought,
right?
SUE KLEBOLD: Well, as you said,
up until that
point, knowing Dylan and knowing
the kind
of person he was, those of us
who loved him
and knew him didn't believe he
was capable
of intentionally harming people
or killing
people.
So, we clung to beliefs, such as
you suggested,
that he had been coerced or
tricked, or that
this was a prank that had
somehow gone wrong.
Six months after the tragedy,
when I was finally
shown the evidence at the
sheriff's department,
and we saw things such as the
basement tapes,
we saw photographs of some of
their weapons,
I remember being -- feeling just
ill.
I stood up and thought I was
going to be sick.
I -- it was such a shock to me,
because it
didn't make sense that the child
that I loved
could actually be doing those
things or could
have planned to do those things.
And, for
me, that was almost the
beginning of grief
all over again, because I had to
grieve for
a different human being than I
had loved before.
JEFFREY BROWN: You focus later
on, on the
suicide aspect to this, not
pushing aside
the murder aspect, but the
suicide of your
own son, which really forces and
focuses the
issue on depression.
Now, explain that. What, in the
end, do you
-- what, in the end, do you
think led him
to commit these atrocities?
SUE KLEBOLD: I think, when we
look at suicide,
and we look at murder-suicide as
one small
subset of suicidal acts, we have
to understand
that this is a very complex
issue, that there
are no simple answers or simple
reasons or
explanations.
The things that occur for
someone to experience
that level of suicidality, they
are things
such as biological factors,
genetic factors,
environmental factors, both the
home, the
school, the culture, personality
factors,
and also triggering factors,
such as events
that occur, losses, bullying,
arrests. And
it is all of those things
working together
operating for that one
vulnerable person.
And when someone begins to
deteriorate, when
their thoughts are becoming
suicidal, they
are in the process of losing
access to their
own tools of self-governments,
of conscience,
of reason.
And they reach a state where
they are not
thinking the way the rest of us
are thinking,
if we are healthy. They don't
have the same
decision points. And I believe
that Dylan's
brain health was the reason that
he was involved.
He wasn't able to act in a way
that he would
have if he were not unwell.
JEFFREY BROWN: You write often
here of the
victims, of their families, of
the pain that
you have felt from the
beginning.
You're donating your profits, I
understand,
from the book to charitable
organizations
that look at mental health
issues. But why
write the book at all? Why in
the first place?
You know that, from the moment
this happened
until now, people wonder about
you, wonder
about -- probably wonder now
about the motives
in writing the book.
Why did you want to do it?
SUE KLEBOLD: The reasons for me,
I think,
were primarily because people
who knew me
or knew Dylan or knew our story
would give
me feedback that they were
affected, that
their parenting changed because
of this.
I had met an individual, among
many individuals,
one who had problems with a
youngster who
was 13, and her daughter acted a
little bit
different, a little bit more
withdrawn. And
the mother told me, "Because I
know you and
because I know that kids can
hide things and
some of the things that they
hide can be lethal,"
she explored. She dug into the
kid's life,
asked her daughter repeatedly
and in depth,
and finally was able to learn
from her daughter
that she had been raped while
she had left
the house once when she wasn't
supposed to.
So, I feel that we all have --
the most important
thing we can do is accept the
concept that
someone we love may not be
feeling inside
the way they present to us, and
that is a
responsibility we have as
parents and family
members to try to help them, to
try to elicit
from them what they're
experiencing and to
-- and if we do learn that they
are having
suicidal thoughts or other
thoughts that are
symptomatic of illness, to get
them help.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
The book is "A Mother's
Reckoning: Living
in the Aftermath of Tragedy."
Sue Klebold. Thank you very
much.
SUE KLEBOLD: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Among the
homeless population
in Tijuana, Mexico, are migrants
on the way
to the U.S. And because of
police raids, they're
living in a rival canal, hiding
in the canal's
branching tunnels.
KPBS Fronteras reporter Jean
Guerrero went
inside the tunnels to learn
about the struggles
these migrants face.
A warning: Some of the images in
this story
may be disturbing.
JEAN GUERRERO: Jose Alberto
Zavala is one
of hundreds of migrants living
inside the
Tijuana River Canal's tunnels.
He says he
doesn't feel safe anywhere else.
JOSE ALBERTO ZAVALA, Migrant
(through translator):
They see us outside and the
police pick us
up.
JEAN GUERRERO: Zavala is known
as Chapo, like
the Mexican drug lord, because
of his short
stature. But the similarities
pretty much
end there. He recently rescued
this cat from
the side of the road.
JOSE ALBERTO ZAVALA (through
translator):
She's a girl. The other day, I
banged myself
up because the police were
trying to put me
in one of the rehab centers. But
that's a
kidnapping. What they do is a
violation of
human rights.
JEAN GUERRERO: For years,
Tijuana's homeless
were living out in the open, in
makeshift
tents in a Tijuana River Canal
encampment
known as El Bordo.
But, last spring, the municipal
government
evacuated the encampment,
placing hundreds
of people into rehab centers,
many against
their will. Officials say the
migrants were
hurting tourism and committing
crimes. Many
were using heroin or
methamphetamine after
being deported from the U.S.,
where they had
families and jobs.
Some, like Chapo, say they don't
do drugs
at all, but were sent to rehab
anyway. Since
then, hundreds have escaped or
were released
from these facilities. They're
now hiding
in the storm drains. Police
sometimes track
them down and place them back in
rehab. Others
are taken to jail or put on
buses out of town.
Police raids of the canal are
sometimes proving
fatal. The canal is flanked by
Tijuana's busiest
highways, and when the migrants
run from the
police, some are killed by cars
speeding past.
Just last month, at least two
were killed
trying to escape police.
Chapo has erected memorial
wooden crosses
for several friends he says he
lost during
police raids.
JOSE ALBERTO ZAVALA (through
translator):
The 18th, also chapitas, and the
guy from
Oaxaca. But I don't know why.
JEAN GUERRERO: Chapo says the
police sometimes
arrest migrants when they're
just standing
on the street, trying to find
work in construction,
or washing car windshields with
dirty rags.
A migrant who called himself
Carlos Francisco
says he was run over by a car
while running
across the highway during a
police raid two
days prior. He was injured so
badly, he couldn't
walk.
He says the police came while he
and his friends
were sleeping in the canal.
MAN (through translator): They
come and grab
us. They -- they beat us.
JEAN GUERRERO: Another man had a
large gash
on his head from where he says
police threw
him against the asphalt during
the same raid.
Tijuana's police chief,
Alejandro Lares, defends
his policy of flushing everybody
out of the
canal. He says he is planning a
full-scale
clearing operation in the coming
weeks.
ALEJANDRO LARES VALLADARES,
Tijuana, Mexico,
Police Chief: We're going to
take over the
whole ravine on Tijuana.
JEAN GUERRERO: The federal
government has
jurisdiction over the canal, but
the Tijuana
Police Department has permission
to patrol
the area.
ALEJANDRO LARES VALLADARES: It's
a no-man's
land. So, for that, it's easier
for them to
buy drugs, sell drugs, and
obviously to consume
drugs.
JEAN GUERRERO: Lares says he has
ordered 14
all-terrain vehicles to patrol
the canal.
He expects them to arrive any
day now. When
asked about alleged police
beatings, he says
migrants should file complaints
so that he
can investigate.
ALEJANDRO LARES VALLADARES: I'm
not going
to tolerate any abuse from an
officer to a
citizen.
JEAN GUERRERO: Migrants say they
think filing
complaints would do them more
harm than good.
They fear being arrested if they
confront
police.
Back in the tunnels, Chapo says
the current
strategy of removing migrants
from the canal
makes life so hard for them,
they have no
choice but to turn to petty
crimes, which
can get them arrested. It's a
vicious cycle.
JOSE ALBERTO ZAVALA (through
translator):
They kick you and say, you have
to come with
them. Why? Because you don't
have an I.D.
You shouldn't be sleeping here.
Where do you
want me to sleep if you don't
let me work?
If I go collect cans, you pick
me up. If I
go to the dumpster, you pick me
up.
JEAN GUERRERO: He doesn't think
Tijuana officials
will ever succeed in ridding the
city of homeless
migrants.
JOSE ALBERTO ZAVALA (through
translator):
This is the border. There will
always be migrants,
always, always.
JEAN GUERRERO: But as police
raids of the
canal become more sophisticated
and frequent,
the tunnel dwellers face a
growing challenge.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jean
Guerrero
in Tijuana.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Next, we turn
to our year-long
series Race Matters.
Tonight, special correspondent
Charlayne Hunter-Gault
sits down with Bethann Hardison,
a former
model and current owner of a New
York modeling
agency.
As Hollywood comes under fire
for the lack
of diversity, Hardison shares
her solution
for making the fashion industry
more inclusive.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: For
generations, this
was the face of the fashion
industry, beautiful
models in stunning designer
outfits, but that
face came to be almost always
white, with
a few notable exceptions, like
Naomi Campbell
and Iman.
Enter Bethann Hardison, herself
a former model,
who decided that just wasn't
good enough.
I caught up with her at her home
base in New
York City.
Bethann Hardison, thank you for
joining us.
BETHANN HARDISON, Modeling
Agency Owner: Thank
you for having me.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: You
know, we have
seen all the beautiful models
like Beverly
Johnson, Iman, even yourself in
magazines
for many years, but there
weren't many of
you.
Why was that? What was that
like?
BETHANN HARDISON: Well, there
were many back
in the day.
I mean, back in the '70s and
'80s, there was
a great deal between runway and
print. And
then, by, say, 2000 -- well,
'80s and the
'90s, it was pretty good. And
then by '90,
mid-'90s, it just began to
disappear.
It was a change of the industry
because of
the Eastern European models
start to come
in. Things just changed. The
business changed.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, this
influx of
non-black people, non-women of
color really
decimated the ranks of black
models on the
runway?
BETHANN HARDISON: It definitely
did. It changed
everything. And when they began
to bring in
more girls from outside, what
changed greatly
was the body alignment of the
Eastern European
girls, because the hips are very
narrow, the
bodies are very long. And that
discovery was
something else.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: What was
wrong with
that, and what did you do about
it?
BETHANN HARDISON: So, what I did
is, I got
encouraged to, please, do
something. And I
thought it, and had the first
press conference,
which was in 2007, and pulled
together editors,
models, people who basically
represented models,
everyone, writers, in a room of
86 seats,
and sat down and discussed the
whole situation.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And so
you moved from
being a model to a muse to a
revolutionary.
(LAUGHTER)
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: You
called out some
of the most famous designers in
the world
of fashion. Did you tell them
they were perpetuating
racism?
BETHANN HARDISON: No, I didn't
say that exactly.
What I said is that the -- no
matter what
your intention is, the result is
racism, so
that if they felt like, well, I
mean, I don't
-- I'm not a racist. Well, I
didn't say you
were a racist. I said the act of
eliminating
one race, or not being
inclusive, the result
is racism. If you consistently
demonstrate
you not being inclusive, then
the result is
racism.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, what
was their
reaction, and what happened as a
result?
BETHANN HARDISON: What I had
done is written
this letter specifically to the
councils of
fashion in each fashion city, so
the councils
of fashion got the letter.
And all the names were written
on each one,
so that's London, Paris, Milan,
and New York.
And so I, before -- as they got
the letter,
I had already spoken to the
press, at the
same time they were getting the
letter, so
the press, which was Women's
Wear Daily, which
is our trade paper, contacted
each one of
them.
British was very good. She said,
we have issues
with this ourselves. We would
like you to
be able to have you come in and
speak to us.
The Italians said, we never had
this as an
issue because no one ever
brought this to
our attention before.
The Parisians laughed it off.
And New York
said, she knows us. Why couldn't
she have
spoken to us directly? She knows
us.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, why
did you think
you had to go the way you went,
as opposed
to knowing them and speaking to
them like
they said?
BETHANN HARDISON: When you have
an issue that
big, you have to come, you know,
in a sense
that it is that serious. It's
not a personal
conversation.
Once it went -- one publication
picked it
up, then it became important,
that other news
medias picked it up, and it
became a very
important issue because it was
done in such
a strong way.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But why
was it important?
People would say, oh, they're
just talking
about fashion. That's just
something people
play with.
BETHANN HARDISON: Because of the
fact that
fashion is no longer just in our
tiny island
that no one knows anything
about.
Now it's part of popular
culture. Now it's
influencing young people. Anyone
now is involved
with fashion. It's beginning to
show people
what things should look like.
It's giving
you the idea of what we see, how
we act, how
we be when it comes down to
race.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: All
right, when you
look beyond the fashion industry
and you look
at the fact that so many -- so
much in the
corporate world is still
dominated by white
males, how much of the solution
that you came
up with can be adapted to other
-- to the
corporate world and to other
areas, where
-- that it's like even
Hollywood, where you
have got major problems with
diversity?
What about what you did is
applicable in those
situations?
BETHANN HARDISON: Because now,
slowly, my
industry is beginning to become
more inclusive.
And when you begin to see in
magazines that
they are now becoming more
inclusive, when
And when you begin to see in
magazines that
they are now becoming more
inclusive, when
you start to see runway shows,
you start to
see blacks, girls, guys, it
begins to remind
people that it's OK, it doesn't
hurt, it's
not going to make you sick. It's
not a disease
to be inclusive.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But I
guess my question
is, in terms of the tactics that
you used,
what would you offer as a
solution to parts
of our society that are not
inclusive and
not as diverse as they should
be?
BETHANN HARDISON: That's a very
good question.
I think the only thing I can
answer is, everyone
has to be responsible. Everyone
has to think
twice about it. And I have to
remind people
that people who are privileged
are the first
ones who say: Why do we always
have to talk
about race? What is the problem?
I don't see
what is the problem. Race, we're
always bringing
up race. I mean, I really don't
see a problem
with it.
That's a privileged attitude.
And when you
think -- if you don't think that
you're privileged,
you say that, that makes you
privileged, because
there is a problem.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So you
have to stay
on the case.
BETHANN HARDISON: Yes. You never
can take
your foot off the gas.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And this
would apply
to the corporate world, as well
as to the
world of fashion?
BETHANN HARDISON: Everything.
Can we all stop
thinking so consciously about
race, or should
we consciously think about race?
Yes, I think
we should consciously think
about race.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And you
need people
like yourself in the corporate
world taking
the kinds of positions you took?
BETHANN HARDISON: I think also
not only people
like myself. I think I need more
white people
like myself, who think like I
do, and not
be afraid to speak up and say,
I'm sorry.
We need to have some. Let's
change some of
this, because it happens in my
industry.
Do I want it to be all black?
No, I want diversity,
because I think, once you
diversify, it reminds
people gently how the world
looks, not -- don't
book a model because she's
black. Book a model
because she's undeniably
beautiful. That's
for him and for her. Then we can
compete with
our white counterpart.
And it's not just the black
model I'm fighting
for. I'm fighting for any
fashion model that
is non-Caucasian, because the
Caucasian kid
is good. She's got it. She can
run. I'm looking
for everyone else who makes up
-- I want the
world to look like when I walk
out on the
street. This is not a Woody
Allen movie.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
Bethann Hardison,
thank you for joining us.
BETHANN HARDISON: And thank you
for having
me.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And speaking
of movies,
tomorrow on the "NewsHour,"
Jeffrey Brown
examines the cause and
implications of the
lack of diversity in the
entertainment industry
ahead of the Academy Awards this
weekend.
Finally, another installment in
our Brief
But Spectacular series.
Today, we hear from poet
Mahogany L. Browne,
who is coordinating a Women of
the World Poetry
Slam running March 9 through the
12th in Brooklyn,
New York.
This piece is entitled "Black
Girl Magic."
MAHOGANY L. BROWNE, Poet: They
say you ain't
supposed to be here.
You ain't supposed to wear red
lipstick. You
ain't supposed to wear high
heels. You ain't
supposed to smile in public. You
ain't supposed
to smile nowhere, black girl.
You ain't supposed
to be no more than a girlfriend.
You ain't
supposed to get married. You
ain't supposed
to want no dreams that big. You
to dream at all.
You ain't supposed to do nothing
but carry
babies and carry felons and
carry weaves and
carry silence and carry families
and carry
confusion and carry a nation,
but never an
opinion, because you ain't
supposed to have
nothing to say, black girl, not
unless it's
a joke, because you ain't
supposed to love
yourself, black girl.
You ain't supposed to find
nothing worth saving
in all that brown. You ain't
supposed to know
that Tina, Beyonce, Cecily,
Shonda Rhimes
shine, shine, shine. Black girl,
you ain't
supposed to love your mind. You
ain't supposed
to love. You ain't supposed to
be loved up
on. You only supposed to pose
voodoo child
vixen style.
You supposed to pop out babies
and hide the
stretch marks. You supposed to
be still, so
still they think you statue, so
still they
think you a chalked outline, so
keep thinking you stone, until
you look more
Medusa than Viola Davis, until
you sound more
Shanaynay than Kerry Washington,
until you
more side eye than Michelle
Obama on a Tuesday
But you tell them you are more
than a hot
comb and a wash and set. You are
Kunta Kinte's
kin. You are a black girl worth
remembering
and you are a threat knowing
yourself. You
are a threat loving yourself.
You are a threat
loving your kin. You are a
threat loving your
children, you black girl magic,
you black
girl fly, you black girl
brilliance, you black
girl wonder, you black girl
shine, you black
girl bloom, you black girl,
black girl.
girl wonder, you black girl
shine, you black
girl bloom, you black girl,
black girl.
And you turning into a beautiful
black woman
right before our eyes.
My name is Mahogany L. Browne,
and this is
my Brief But Spectacular take on
black girl magic.
My name is Mahogany L. Browne,
and this is
my Brief But Spectacular take on
black girl magic.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can watch
other episodes
of our
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can watch
other episodes
of our
Brief But Spectacular series
on
our Facebook page,
Facebook.com/"NewsHour."
On the "NewsHour" online: New
Orleans' culture
plays a big role in Beyonce's
video for her
latest single, "Formation," and
so do its
residents, including Big
Freedia, known as
the Queen of Bounce after the
style of hip-hop
she performs. We talked to the
artist about
her Southern roots and the
origins of bounce.
You can read that conversation
on our home
page.
And we have more from Robert
Reich, the economist
and former secretary of labor
who sat down
with Paul Solman to discuss
middle-class anxiety
and the current state of the
economy. You
can find that on our Making
Sense page.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tune in later tonight on
"Charlie Rose: The
Week": the founder of Airbnb,
Brian Chesky,
on the sharing economy.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Friday: Judy Woodruff's
report from South
Carolina, a day ahead of the
Democratic Party
and Democratic primary.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
with our analysis of the week's
news with
syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and Ramesh
Ponnuru of The National Review.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you. Have a good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you. Have a good night.